Document TLS Certificates flow with Cert Manager (#2079)
minio/operator: docs/cert-manager.md

# MinIO tenant with cert-manager [![Slack](https://slack.min.io/slack?type=svg)](https://slack.min.io)

This document explains how to deploy a MinIO tenant using certificates generated by [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) 
using a self-signed issuer.

> On A Kubernetes cluster, Certificate Manager requires at a global level a `Cluster Issuer` to generated intermediary Issuers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On a Kubernetes cluster, Certificate Manager requires, at a global level, a `Cluster Issuer` to generate intermediary Issuers
```

  commonName: operator
  secretName: operator-ca-tls
  duration: 70128h # 8y
  privateKey:
    algorithm: ECDSA
    size: 256
  issuerRef:
    name: selfsigned-root
    kind: ClusterIssuer
    group: cert-manager.io
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f operator-ca-tls-secret.yaml
```
A new secret with the name `operator-ca-tls` is created in the `minio-operator` namespace.
This is the CA issuing TLS certificates for the services in the `minio-operator` namespace. MinIO Operator copies this secret, using the same name (`operator-ca-tls`), into all the Tenant namespaces and keeps the secret contents in sync.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Make sure to trust this certificate in your applications that need to interact with either the `console` or the `sts` service.

### Create TLS certificate for STS service

Request Cert Manager to issue a new certificate containing following DNS domains:

```shell
sts
sts.minio-operator.svc.
sts.minio-operator.svc.<cluster domain>
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Replace `<cluster domain>` with the actual values for your MinIO tenant.
> `cluster domain` is the internal root DNS domain assigned in your Kubernetes cluster. Typically this is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns

> > configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -oyaml | yq ".data"`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -o yaml | yq ".data"`. 
```

> `cluster domain` is the internal root DNS domain assigned in your Kubernetes cluster. Typically this is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns
> configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -oyaml | yq ".data"`.
> The way the root DNS domain is managed can vary depending on the Kubernetes distribution (Openshift, Rancher, EKS, etc.)

Create a `Certificate` for the domains mentioned above:

```yaml
# console-tls-certificate.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: console-certmanager-cert
  namespace: minio-operator
spec:
  dnsNames:
    - console
    - console.minio-operator.svc
    - console.minio-operator.svc.cluster.local
  secretName: console-tls
  issuerRef:
    name: minio-operator-ca-issuer
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f console-tls-certificate.yaml
```

This creates a secret called `console-tls` in the `minio-operator` namespace.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The secret name is not optional. Make sure the secret name is `console-tls` by setting `spec.secretName: console-tls` as in the example above.

> ### Install Operator with Auto TLS disabled for STS

Reviewer: Perhaps suggest:
```
kubectl patch deployment -n minio-operator minio-operator -p '{"spec":{"template":{"spec":{"containers":[{"name": "minio-operator", "env": [{"name": "OPERATOR_STS_AUTO_TLS_ENABLED", "value": "off"}, {"name": "MINIO_CONSOLE_TLS_ENABLE", "value": "off"}]}]}}}}'
```

Author: a patch is not neccesary, the example yaml above already have this secret name, here I just wanted to highlight that what the secret name should be and where should set it.

Author: at the moment Operator deployment is created should have already the values, otherwise have adverse effects, I am adding instructions to do it with a kustomization

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:
- github.com/minio/operator/resources

patches:
- patch: |-
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    metadata:
      name: minio-operator
      namespace: minio-operator
    spec:
      template:
        spec:
          containers:
            - name: minio-operator
              env:
                - name: MINIO_CONSOLE_TLS_ENABLE
                  value: "off"
                - name: OPERATOR_STS_AUTO_TLS_ENABLED
                  value: "off"
                - name: OPERATOR_STS_ENABLED
                  value: "on"

```

MinIO Operator from issuing the certificate for STS and instead wait for you to provide the TLS certificate issued by Cert Manager.

Also make sure to set `MINIO_CONSOLE_TLS_ENABLE: off` env variable, this prevents MinIO Operator from issuing the certificate for Console
and instead will expect you to provide the TLS certificate issued by Cert Manager.

> [!WARNING]
> Failing to provide the secret `sts-tls` containing the TLS certificate or providing an invalid key-pair in the secret will
> prevent the STS service from starting.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: minio-operator
  namespace: minio-operator
spec:
...
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        name: minio-operator
...
    spec:
      serviceAccountName: minio-operator
      containers:
        - name: minio-operator
          image: minio/operator:v5.0.14
...
          env:
            - name: MINIO_CONSOLE_TLS_ENABLE:
              value: "off"
            - name: OPERATOR_STS_AUTO_TLS_ENABLED
              value: "off"
            - name: OPERATOR_STS_ENABLED
              value: "on"
```

# MinIO tenant TLS certificates with cert-manager

> ## Create tenant-1 namespace CA Issuer

Reviewer: Perhaps suggest to deploy the tenant first, and to set:
```
kubectl patch tenant -n tenant-1 myminio --type='merge' -p '{"spec":{"requestAutoCert": false, "env": [{"name": "MINIO_BROWSER_LOGIN_ANIMATION","value": "false"}, {"name": "MINIO_CI_CD", "value": "on"}] }}'
```

Author: If the Tenant is deployed with defaut values `requestAutoCert` will be true,  and Operator is going to create the autocerts, this can lead to conflicts, instead the Tenant should be created with `requestAutoCert: false` from the begginging, not patching.

Reviewer 2: Should we try to catch that with validation? that is, if cert-manager and auto-cert should not be mixed, we should reject that in some way (at least in UI if not via crd) ?

Author: Certificates provided in the `spec. externalCertSecret` and `spec.requestAutoCert` are not opposites, we could have `.spec.requestAutoCert: true` and yet have cert manager provision additional certificates for the Load Balancer  domain, or additional domains that MinIO needs to handle in `spec.externalCertSecret`

Is just that in this guide, where we only use cert manager `spec. requestAutoCert` is not needed, we just need to turn it off.

> * `cluster domain` is the internal root DNS domain assigned in your Kubernetes cluster. Typically this is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns
> configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -oyaml | yq ".data"`.
> The way the root DNS domain is managed can vary depending on the Kubernetes distribution (Openshift, Rancher, EKS, etc.)
> * `tenant-name` is the name provided to your tenant in the `metadata.name` of the Tenant YAML. For this example it is `myminio`.
> * `namespace` is the namespace where the tenant is created, the `metadata.namespace` notes that in the Tenant YAML. For this example it is `tenant-1`.

Create a `Certificate` for the domains mentioned above:

```yaml
# tenant-1-minio-certificate.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: tenant-certmanager-cert
  namespace: tenant-1
spec:
  dnsNames:
    - "minio.tenant-1"
    - "minio.tenant-1.svc"
    - '*.minio-tenant-1.svc.cluster.local'
    - '*.minio.tenant-1.svc.cluster.local'
    - '*.myminio-hl.tenant-1.svc.cluster.local'
  secretName: myminio-tls
  issuerRef:

>     name: tenant-certmanager-issuer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    name: tenant-1-ca-issuer
```

Reviewer: Most important change

```

> [!TIP]
> For this example, the Tenant name is `myminio`. We recommend naming the secret in the field `spec.secretName` as `<tenant name>-tls`, following the naming
> convention MinIO Operator uses when creates certificates with Autocert enabled (`spec.requestAutoCert: true`).

```shell
kubectl apply -f tenant-1-minio-certificate.yaml
```

### Configure the tenant to use the certificate created by cert-manager 

> In the tenant spec, do the following:

Reviewer: Perhaps suggest editing with `kubectl -n tenant-1 edit tenant/myminio`, or running the patch command suggested earlier.

Author: Same thing, a later patch will have adverse effects, we want to make sure tenant has the value in `spec.externalCertSecret` set from the moment is created

metadata:
  name: myminio
  namespace: tenant-1
spec:
  ## Disable default tls certificates.
  requestAutoCert: false
  ## Use certificates generated by cert-manager.
  externalCertSecret:
    - name: myminio-tls
      type: cert-manager.io/v1
```

## Trust tenant-1 CA in MinIO Operator

MinIO Operator can trust as many CA certificates as provided. To do this, create a secret with the prefix `operator-ca-tls-` 
followed by a unique identifier in the `minio-operator` namespace.

MinIO Operator mounts and trusts all certificates issued by the provided CA's. This is required because
MinIO Operator performs health checks using the */minio/health/cluster* endpoint.

If Operator is not correctly configured to trust the MinIO Certificate (or its CA), you will see an error message like the following in the Operator Pod logs:

```error
Failed to get cluster health: Get "https://minio.tenant-1.svc.cluster.local/minio/health/cluster":
x509: certificate signed by unknown authority
```
For more details about health checks, see https://min.io/docs/minio/Kubernetes/upstream/operations/monitoring/healthcheck-probe.html#cluster-write-quorum.

### Create `operator-ca-tls-tenant-1` secret

> Copy the Cert Manager generated CA public key (ca.crt) into the minio-operator namespace. This allows Operator to trust

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Copy the Cert Manager generated CA public key (ca.crt) into the `minio-operator` namespace. This allows Operator to trust
```

Create a `Certificate` for the domains mentioned above:

```yaml
# sts-tls-certificate.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: sts-certmanager-cert
  namespace: minio-operator
spec:
  dnsNames:
    - sts
    - sts.minio-operator.svc
    - sts.minio-operator.svc.cluster.local
  secretName: sts-tls
  issuerRef:
    name: minio-operator-ca-issuer
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f sts-tls-certificate.yaml
```
This creates a secret called `sts-tls` in the `minio-operator` namespace.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The secret name is not optional. Make sure the secret name is `sts-tls` by setting `spec.secretName: sts-tls` as in the example above.

### Create TLS certificate for Console service

Request Cert Manager to issue a new certificate including the following DNS domains for console:

```shell
console
console.minio-operator.svc.
console.minio-operator.svc.<cluster domain>
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Replace `<cluster domain>` with the actual values for your MinIO tenant.
> `cluster domain` is the internal root DNS domain assigned in your Kubernetes cluster. Typically this is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns

> > configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -oyaml | yq ".data"`.

Author: syntax works as-is anyways but doesn't hurt to split it

Also make sure to set `MINIO_CONSOLE_TLS_ENABLE: off` env variable, this prevents MinIO Operator from issuing the certificate for Console
and instead will expect you to provide the TLS certificate issued by Cert Manager.

> [!WARNING]
> Failing to provide the secret `sts-tls` containing the TLS certificate or providing an invalid key-pair in the secret will
> prevent the STS service from starting.

A way to make sure that the env variables are properly set is using kustomization to patch the `minio-operator` Deployment:

```yaml
# minio-operator/kustomization.yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization

resources:
- github.com/minio/operator/resources

patches:
- patch: |-
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    metadata:
      name: minio-operator
      namespace: minio-operator
    spec:
      template:
        spec:
          containers:
            - name: minio-operator
              env:
                - name: MINIO_CONSOLE_TLS_ENABLE
                  value: "off"
                - name: OPERATOR_STS_AUTO_TLS_ENABLED
                  value: "off"
                - name: OPERATOR_STS_ENABLED
                  value: "on"
```

```shell

> kubectl apply -k minio-operator

Reviewer: This did not work for me. This may be perhaps better:
```
kubectl patch deployment -n minio-operator minio-operator -p '{"spec":{"template":{"spec":{"containers":[{"name": "minio-operator", "env": [{"name": "OPERATOR_STS_AUTO_TLS_ENABLED", "value": "off"}, {"name": "MINIO_CONSOLE_TLS_ENABLE", "value": "off"}, {"name": "OPERATOR_STS_ENABLED", "value": "on"}]}]}}}}'
```

Reviewer: This requires that you NOT have an operator deployment previously installed. If there is a previous deployment then the patch will go through, but it implies that the Operator deployment was created before, with the env variable OPERATOR_STS_AUTO_TLS_ENABLED default value as "ON", that is no good, because Operator is going to create CSR's and secretes before you are able to patch; we want to avoid that.

kind: Issuer
metadata:
  name: tenant-1-ca-issuer
  namespace: tenant-1
spec:
  ca:
    secretName: tenant-1-ca-tls
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f tenant-1-ca-issuer.yaml
```

Next, request a Certificate with `spec.isCA: true` specified:

```yaml
# tenant-1-ca-certificate.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: tenant-1-ca-certificate
  namespace: tenant-1
spec:
  isCA: true
  commonName: tenant-1-ca
  secretName: tenant-1-ca-tls
  duration: 70128h # 8y
  privateKey:
    algorithm: ECDSA
    size: 256
  issuerRef:
    name: selfsigned-root
    kind: ClusterIssuer
    group: cert-manager.io
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f tenant-1-ca-certificate.yaml
```

## Deploy the tenant 

### Create a certificate for Tenant

Request Cert Manager issue a new TLS server certificate for MinIO that includes the following DNS domains:

```shell
minio.<namespace>
minio.<namespace>.svc
minio.<namespace>.svc.<cluster domain>
*.<tenant-name>-hl.<namespace>.svc.<cluster domain>
*.<namespace>.svc.<cluster domain>
*.<tenant-name>.minio.<namespace>.svc.<cluster domain>'
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Replace `<cluster domain>` with the actual values for your MinIO tenant.

> > * `cluster domain` is the internal root DNS domain assigned in your Kubernetes cluster. Typically this is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * `<cluster domain>` is the internal root DNS domain assigned in your Kubernetes cluster. Typically this is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns
```

> > configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -oyaml | yq ".data"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -o yaml | yq ".data"`.
```

followed by a unique identifier in the `minio-operator` namespace.

MinIO Operator mounts and trusts all certificates issued by the provided CA's. This is required because
MinIO Operator performs health checks using the */minio/health/cluster* endpoint.

If Operator is not correctly configured to trust the MinIO Certificate (or its CA), you will see an error message like the following in the Operator Pod logs:

```error
Failed to get cluster health: Get "https://minio.tenant-1.svc.cluster.local/minio/health/cluster":
x509: certificate signed by unknown authority
```
For more details about health checks, see https://min.io/docs/minio/Kubernetes/upstream/operations/monitoring/healthcheck-probe.html#cluster-write-quorum.

### Create `operator-ca-tls-tenant-1` secret

Copy the Cert Manager generated CA public key (ca.crt) into the `minio-operator` namespace. This allows Operator to trust
the cert-manager issued CA and the derived certificates.

Create a `ca.crt` file containing the CA:
```sh
kubectl get secrets -n tenant-1 tenant-1-ca-tls -o=jsonpath='{.data.ca\.crt}' | base64 -d > ca.crt
```

Create the secret:
```sh

> kubectl create secret generic operator-ca-tls-tenant1 --from-file=ca.crt -n minio-operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl create secret generic operator-ca-tls-tenant-1 --from-file=ca.crt -n minio-operator
```

# MinIO tenant with cert-manager [![Slack](https://slack.min.io/slack?type=svg)](https://slack.min.io)

This document explains how to deploy a MinIO tenant using certificates generated by [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) 
using a self-signed issuer.

On a Kubernetes cluster, Certificate Manager requires a global level `Cluster Issuer` to generate intermediary Issuers and certificates. 

At the namespace level, Cert Manager issues certificates derivative of a `Issuer`.

The main difference between a `Cluster Issuer` and a `Issuer` is that `Cluster Issuer` can Issue certificates for several namespaces and an `Issuer` can only issue them in a single namespace.

To learn more about Cert Manager Issuers refer to their documentation https://cert-manager.io/docs/concepts/issuer/.

For example below is a logical view of a Kubernetes cluster:

![Cert-manager-namespaces.png](images%2FCert-manager-namespaces.png)

This cluster contains 4 namespaces:

- minio-operator
- tenant-1
- tenant-2
- other-namespace

Each namespace contains pods and services. This environment requires a Cert Manager

> to issue certificates so the different services and pods can trust each others certificates. 

Reviewer 4: typo
```suggestion
to issue certificates so the different services and pods can trust each others' certificates. 
```

To do this, create a global root issuer and an intermediary issuer in each tenant namespace:

![Cert-manager Issuers.png](images%2FCert-manager%20Issuers.png)

> Cert Manager is installed in the `cert-manager` namespace, as per the Root Issuer, it is created in the default namespace. Each namespace also requires a local Issuer, as does the minio-operator namespace.

Author: From this 3 services, for the `sts` and the `console` services we are still issuing certificates using CertificateSigningRequest (CSR), but is an isolated flow from the one for Tenants.

```
kubectl get service -n minio-operator
NAME       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)             AGE
console    ClusterIP   10.96.102.13    <none>        9090/TCP,9443/TCP   7d3h
operator   ClusterIP   10.96.184.30    <none>        4221/TCP            7d3h
sts        ClusterIP   10.96.199.156   <none>        4223/TCP            7d3h
```

I wanted to mention this certificate as part of the `Cert Manager` documentation but missed that part let me add it.

> Cert Manager is installed in the `cert-manager` namespace, as per the Root Issuer, it is created in the default namespace. Each namespace also requires a local Issuer, as does the minio-operator namespace.

Author: Instructions added

> [!NOTE]  
> This guide uses a self-signed Cluster Issuer. You can also use [other Issuers supported by Cert Manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/configuration/issuers/).
> The main difference is that you must provide the `Issuer` CA certificate to minio, instead of the `root` CA used in this guide.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Kubernetes version `+v1.21`. While cert-manager
  supports [earlier K8s versions](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/supported-releases/), MinIO Operator requires 1.21 or later.
- MinIO Operator installed
- [kustomize](https://kustomize.io/) installed
- `kubectl` access to your `k8s` cluster
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/releases/release-notes/release-notes-1.12/) 1.12.X (preferred) or later installed.

## Setup Cert-manager

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/releases/download/v1.12.9/cert-manager.yaml
```

### Create Cluster Self-signed root Issuer

> The root Issuer is the root level on certificate all other certificates are derived from. 

Reviewer 4: oops typo
```suggestion
The root Issuer is the root level certificate all other certificates are derived from. 
```

Request Cert Manager to generate this by creating a `ClusterIssuer` resource:

```yaml
# selfsigned-root-clusterissuer.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: ClusterIssuer
metadata:
  name: selfsigned-root
spec:
  selfSigned: {}
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f selfsigned-root-clusterissuer.yaml
```

### Create tenant-1 namespace CA intermediary Issuer

Create the Intermediary Certificate Authority (CA) certificate used to issue certificates for MinIO.

First create the `Issuer`:

```yaml
# tenant-1-ca-issuer.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Issuer
metadata:
  name: tenant-1-ca-issuer
  namespace: tenant-1
spec:
  ca:
    secretName: tenant-1-ca-secret
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f tenant-1-ca-issuer.yaml
```

> Next, request a Certificate with `isCA: true` specified. This is our intermediary CA.

Reviewer 4: is this the correct way to refer to individual items in the yaml?
```suggestion
Next, request a Certificate with `spec.isCA: true` specified. This is our intermediary CA.
```

At the namespace level, Cert Manager issues certificates derived from an `Issuer`.
The main difference between a `Cluster Issuer` and an `Issuer` is that `Cluster Issuer` can issue certificates for several
namespaces and an `Issuer` can only issue them in a single namespace.

To learn more about Cert Manager Issuers refer to their documentation https://cert-manager.io/docs/concepts/issuer/.

Below is a logical view of a Kubernetes cluster:

![Cert-manager-namespaces.png](images%2FCert-manager-namespaces.png)

This cluster contains 4 namespaces:

- minio-operator
- tenant-1
- tenant-2
- other-namespace

This guide shows you how to set up different Certificate Authorities (CA) in each namespace, all of them referencing a global `Cluster Issuer`.

![Cert-manager Issuers.png](images%2FCert-manager%20Issuers.png)

Cert Manager is installed in the `cert-manager` namespace.

The global `Cluster Issuer` is created in the default namespace.

A local `Issuer` is created in each tenant namespace.

An `Issuer` is also created in the `minio-operator` namespace. More about services that require TLS certificates

> in the `minio-operator` namespace are covered below in [MinIO Operator services with cert-manager](# MinIO Operator services with cert-manager).

Author: going to do this in other PR, would not like to miss the approvals again

> in the `minio-operator` namespace are covered below in [MinIO Operator services with cert-manager](# MinIO Operator services with cert-manager).

Author: fixed on https://github.com/minio/operator/pull/2154

> [!NOTE]  
> This guide uses a self-signed `Cluster Issuer`. You can also use [other Issuers supported by Cert Manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/configuration/issuers/).
> The main difference is that you must provide the `Issuer` CA certificate to minio, instead of the CA's mentioned in this guide.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Kubernetes version `+v1.21`. While cert-manager
  supports [earlier K8s versions](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/supported-releases/), MinIO Operator requires 1.21 or later.
- [kustomize](https://kustomize.io/) installed
- `kubectl` access to your `k8s` cluster

### Setup Cert-manager

> Install [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/releases/release-notes/release-notes-1.12/) 1.12.X LTS is preferred,

Author: 1.12 LTS is the one this guide is tested on, latest might have some changes so I better stick to the last TLS for now

or install latest, for example using kubectl.

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/releases/download/v1.12.9/cert-manager.yaml
```

For more details on the Cert Manager refer to https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/.

### Create Cluster Self-signed root Issuer

The `Cluster Issuer` is the cluster level Issuer all other certificates are derived from. Request Cert Manager to
generate this by creating a `ClusterIssuer` resource:

```yaml
# selfsigned-root-clusterissuer.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: ClusterIssuer
metadata:
  name: selfsigned-root
spec:
  selfSigned: {}
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f selfsigned-root-clusterissuer.yaml
```

# MinIO Operator services with cert-manager

MinIO Operator manages the TLS certificate issuing for the services hosted in the `minio-operator` namespace. These include Secure Token Service `sts` and the Console `console` service.

This section describes how to generate the `sts` and `console` TLS certificates with Cert Manager.
These certificates must be issued before installing Operator.

> Be sure to follow step [Create Cluster Self-signed root Issuer ](#Create Cluster Self-signed root Issuer) mentioned above.

Author: Fixed on https://github.com/minio/operator/pull/2154

    name: selfsigned-root
    kind: ClusterIssuer
    group: cert-manager.io
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f operator-ca-tls-secret.yaml
```
A new secret with the name `operator-ca-tls` is created in the `minio-operator` namespace, this is the CA issuing TLS certificates for the services in the `minio-operator` namespace.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Make sure to trust this certificate in your applications that need to interact with either the `console` or the `sts` service.

Now create the `Issuer`:

```yaml
# operator-ca-issuer.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Issuer
metadata:
  name: minio-operator-ca-issuer
  namespace: minio-operator
spec:
  ca:
    secretName: operator-ca-tls
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f operator-ca-issuer.yaml
```

### Create TLS certificate for STS service

Request Cert Manager to issue a new certificate containing following DNS domains:

```shell
sts
sts.minio-operator.svc.
sts.minio-operator.svc.<cluster domain>
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Replace `<cluster domain>` with the actual values for your MinIO tenant.
> `cluster domain` is the internal root DNS domain assigned in your Kubernetes cluster. Typically this is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns

> > configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -o yaml | yq ".data"`. 

Author: going to do this in other PR, would not like to miss the approvals again

> > configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -o yaml | yq ".data"`. 

Author: applied this suggestion on https://github.com/minio/operator/pull/2154

> `<cluster domain>` is the internal root DNS domain assigned in your Kubernetes cluster. Typically this is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns
> configuration for the correct value for your Kubernetes cluster. For example, using `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -o yaml | yq ".data"`.
> The way the root DNS domain is managed can vary depending on the Kubernetes distribution (Openshift, Rancher, EKS, etc.)

Create a `Certificate` for the domains mentioned above:

```yaml
# console-tls-certificate.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: console-certmanager-cert
  namespace: minio-operator
spec:
  dnsNames:
    - console
    - console.minio-operator.svc
    - console.minio-operator.svc.cluster.local
  secretName: console-tls
  issuerRef:
    name: minio-operator-ca-issuer
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f console-tls-certificate.yaml
```

This creates a secret called `console-tls` in the `minio-operator` namespace.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The secret name is not optional. Make sure the secret name is `console-tls` by setting `spec.secretName: console-tls` as in the example above.

> ### Install Operator with Auto TLS disabled for STS

Author: Helm is another install method we need to work on, but it is already documented how to set env variables there
https://github.com/minio/operator/blob/c6737b74eb9cacf14d86bdd7d4e3c41d66404180/helm/operator/values.yaml#L5-L32

minio.<namespace>.svc.<cluster domain>
*.<tenant-name>-hl.<namespace>.svc.<cluster domain>
*.<namespace>.svc.<cluster domain>
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Replace `<tenant-name>`, `<namespace>` and `<cluster domain>` with the actual values for your MinIO tenant, Please note the 3 key element names:
> * `tenant-name` is the name provided to your tenant this is the one provided in the `metadata.name` of the Tenant YAML, for this example it will be `myminio`.
> * `namespace` is the namespace where the tenant is created, the `metadata.namespace` notes that in the Tenant YAML, for this example it will be `tenant-1`.
> * `cluster domain` is the DNS assigned in your kubernetes cluster, typically it is `cluster.local`, check on your coredns configuration for the right one assigned to your kubernetes cluster.
> For example querying `kubectl get configmap coredns -n kube-system -oyaml | yq ".data"`, this command could vary depending on the Kubernetes distribution like Openshift, Rancher, EKS, etc.

Create a `Certificate` for the domains mentioned above:

```yaml
# tenant-1-minio-certificate.yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: tenant-certmanager-cert

>   namespace: tenant1

Reviewer 5: I guess there is a typo here that caused this to fail:
```suggestion
  namespace: tenant-1
```

Author: right, thanks

spec:
  dnsNames:
    - "minio.tenant-1"
    - "minio.tenant-1.svc"
    - '*.minio-tenant-1.svc.cluster.local'
    - '*.minio.tenant-1.svc.cluster.local'
    - '*.myminio-hl.tenant-1.svc.cluster.local'
  secretName: tenant-certmanager-tls
  issuerRef:
    name: tenant-certmanager-issuer
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f tenant-1-minio-certificate.yaml
```

### Setup tenant to use certificate created by cert-manager 

In the tenant spec make sure to do the following steps:

* Disable `spec.requestAutoCert` as this will instruct Operator to do not attempt to issue certificates and instead rely on Cert Manager to provide them on secrets.
* Reference the Secret containing the TLS certificate we just issued in the previous step in `spec.externalCertSecret`.

Here is an example of Tenant sections should look like:

```yaml
apiVersion: minio.min.io/v2
kind: Tenant
metadata:
  name: myminio
  namespace: tenant-1
spec:
  ## Disable default tls certificates.
  requestAutoCert: false
  ## Use certificates generated by cert-manager.
  externalCertSecret:
    - name: tenant-certmanager-tls
      type: cert-manager.io/v1
```

## Trust CA in MinIO Operator

> MinIO Operator can trust as much CA certificates as provided, just create a secret with the prefix `operator-ca-tls-` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MinIO Operator can trust as many CA certificates as provided, just create a secret with the prefix `operator-ca-tls-` 
```

followed by an identifier in the `minio-operator` namespace, in this example the secret name will be `operator-ca-tls-tenant-1`.

> MinIO Operator is going to mount and trust all certificates issued by the provided CA's, this is specially needed because

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MinIO Operator is going to mount and trust all certificates issued by the provided CA's. This is specifically needed because
```

> Operator performs health checks from MinIO in the health cluster endpoint (see more in docs https://min.io/docs/minio/kubernetes/upstream/operations/monitoring/healthcheck-probe.html#cluster-write-quorum).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operator performs health checks from MinIO using the health cluster endpoint (see more in docs https://min.io/docs/minio/kubernetes/upstream/operations/monitoring/healthcheck-probe.html#cluster-write-quorum).
```

> Missing to instruct Operator to trust the MinIO Certificate (or it's CA) will cause an error log message in the Operator Pod logs as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not instructing Operator to trust the MinIO Certificate (or its CA) will cause an error log message in the Operator Pod logs as follows:
```

```error

> Failed to get cluster health: Get "https://minio.tenant-lite.svc.cluster.local/minio/health/cluster":

Reviewer 5: I guess there's a typo here as well:
```suggestion
Failed to get cluster health: Get "https://minio.tenant-1.svc.cluster.local/minio/health/cluster":
```

x509: certificate signed by unknown authority
```

### Create `operator-ca-tls-tenant-1` secret

> Copy the cert-manager generated CA certificate into the minio-operator namespace, this will allow Operator to trust the cert-manager issued CA and it's derivatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy the cert-manager generated CA certificate into the minio-operator namespace, this will allow Operator to trust the cert-manager issued CA and its derivatives.
```
